[MUSIC PLAYING]
[MEDITATION CHIME]
>> When you drink your tea,
you may like to bring your mind
back to your body, so that
you'll be completely there,
established in the
present moment.
And when you drink
like that, you
drink not only with your
body, but you drink and so
with your mind.
You drink the tea, and
you are aware that you
are drinking the tea.
That is mindfulness
of drinking, you see?
And when you're drinking
your tea with mindfulness,
you are really there.
And the tea is clearly there.
And in that moment,
there's true life.
If your mind is elsewhere, you
are not entirely with your tea.
You are not there in soul.
So that the act of
drinking tea is not life.
You'll behave-- you operate
like a robot and machine.
Your mind is not there.
Mindful means you
are full of mind.
So when you breathe
in and if you
know that you are breathing
in, that is mindful breathing.
And when you breathe
mindfully, your mind
is back to your body,
mind-body together.
You are truly there
in the here and now.
You are fully alive.
You are fully present.
So mindfulness make you
fully alive, fully present.
Mindfulness is
the kind of energy
that allow you to be
in the here and now,
so that you can get in touch
with the wonders of life that
are in you and around you.
And if you can get in touch
with these wonders of life that
are refreshing,
healing, nourishing,
and you get the
nourishment from it,
you'll get the
healing that you need.
So mindfulness, first
of all, is the capacity
to be truly there in the
here and now in order
for you to get in touch
with the wonders of life,
so that you can
truly live your life.
And when you go
back to yourself,
you might encounter
something that
is negative, like your
sorrow or your fear, anger.
And mindfulness help you
to have an opportunity
to take care of your
fear, your anger.
The energy of
mindfulness may help
you to recognize the
presence of your fear,
your anger, your depression.
The energy of
mindfulness generated
by your mindful breathing can
help you to embrace tenderly
the fear, the sorrow
that is in you, so
that you may get a relief.
So mindfulness can also help
you to take care of yourself
when you need to take care
when you go back to yourself.
And if you encounter
the positive things
and then you can be
nourished and heal
by these positive things,
when mindfulness bring
your mind back to your body and
if you encounter some tensions,
some pain, some sorrow,
then mindfulness
will help recognize, embrace
tenderly, these emotions,
these feelings, these pains
so that you will suffer less.
And mindfulness, if
you practice regularly,
will be stronger every day and
will bring more concentration.
And with mindfulness
and concentration,
you can look deeply
at what is there
and you can understand
deeply the nature
of what is there, maybe
your anger, your fear.
If you know how to look
deeply into the nature
of your fear, your anger,
you will get the insight
into their nature.
And that kind of insight
will liberate you from harm
from your fear, your anger.
So mindfulness bring
concentration and mindfulness
and concentration bring
insight that is liberating.
>> Mindfulness is conscious,
curious, unattached,
nonjudgmental awareness.
It could be awareness of what's
happening in the outside world.
It could be awareness of
what's happening in your body.
It could be awareness
of your thoughts.
It could be awareness of
images and consciousness.
It could be awareness
of emotions.
So when you observe without
judgment, that's mindfulness,
and it's very profound.
It's the highest form
of human intelligence.
Because in the mirror
observing of yourself, because
in that sense, you're observing
you, your perceptions,
your thoughts, your
sensations, your images.
So the highest form
of human intelligence
is to be able to
observe yourself
without judging yourself.
And in the mirror, observation
of yourself without judgment
is transformation insight,
intuition, creativity,
imagination, healing,
self-repair, self-organization,
homeostasis, the tying in
of your biological rhythms
to the rhythms of the universe,
which we call circadian
rhythms and seasonal rhythms.
It's healing, basically.
It's your essential state.
You're a human being.
You're not a human doing.
>> It's the idea
of just noticing,
just noticing in
the present moment,
without putting words to the
experience and just noticing.
Then there's the
describing practice,
which is just to put words
on what the experience is.
The flower has petals.
The petals are red.
The smell is sweet.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
>> When you breathe in and
if you bring your mind,
your attention to
your in breath,
your mind stop all thinking,
whether of the past,
of the future, of your projects.
Your mind is focusing
only on your in breathe.
Stopping the thinking help you.
You become your in breath.
You are concentrated
on your breath.
And when you breathe out,
you focus your attention
on your out breath.
You stop the thinking.
You are only in breath.
The only object of
your mind is your
in breath and your out breath.
You are concentrated on your
in breath, on your out breath.
And if you continue to breathe
like that for a few moments,
the quality of your in
breath and out breath
will be improved.
Your in breath and
out breath have
become slower, more
peaceful, more harmonious,
and you'll feel better.
There's a peace now, more
peace now in your breathing.
And as your breathing
has become more peaceful,
your body will profit from it.
There may be a lot of tension
and pain in your body,
but if your breath
has become peaceful,
your body will
become more peaceful.
And I would propose that when
we go back to our body, now
you should recognize
our body as existing.
And you may realize
that there is
tension and pain in our body.
So I propose the
exercise breathing in,
I am aware of my whole body.
Breathing out, I release
the tension in my body.
So to go back to your
body to recognize
the presence of your body
is a kind of reconciliation
because you may have not
taken good care of your body.
You may have worked
your body to hard,
and you have allowed
tension and pain
to be accumulated
into your body.
And therefore, the mind
going home to the body and
allowed the body to
release the tension.
That's very nice.
That is a practice of
reconciliation with the body,
helping the body to
release the tension.
This is very important.
When you have some
peace in your breathing,
that peace will be
extended to your body.
And then if you have feelings
that are painful emotions,
your mindfulness can help
recognize these emotions,
these painful feelings,
hold them dearly, tenderly,
and help you to get relief.
So first of all, you bring
your mind back to your body
and take care of your body.
And your body will have
more peace, more relaxation,
and then you are in
a position to take
care of your feelings
and your emotions.
There are pleasant feeling.
There are painful feeling.
There are strong emotions
that make you suffer,
so mindfulness is
the kind of energy
that can also recognize
a feeling and emotion
and also help embrace
tenderly that feeling,
that emotion so that
you can get a relief.
And if you are a
good practitioner,
if you continue your practice
of mindful breathing, mindful
holding, then you
can look deeply
into the roots of your
feeling, of your emotion
and find out the reasons,
the causes that have
brought that feeling to you.
And that kind of looking
deeply is called meditation.
It identifies
sources of suffering.
And once you have identified
the roots of your being,
you can get the
liberation that you need.
It's like when your doctor
has identified your sickness,
and then he can
propose you to use
the kind of medicine,
the kind of life that
can help end the sickness.
So mindfulness and concentration
helped bring a relief,
help you to understand deep
root to your suffering,
help you to see the path
leading to the healing,
the transformation.
>> Yes, mindfulness heals
because in mindfulness,
there's equanimity.
And when there is
equanimity, then you're
sustained in that equanimity.
There's joy, and when
there's joy and equanimity,
there's the birth in
that of compassion.
And all of those things
actually cause your body
to go to its
essential state, which
we call in medicine--
we call it homeostasis,
which is self-regulation.
In our society, people
are doing, doing, doing,
and it's mostly mindless doing.
Then, of course,
they're thinking a lot,
and it's mostly
about themselves.
There's no creative
thinking, other
than in the creative fields.
But even that is mostly what
I call simulated creativity.
It's not real creativity.
There's very little feeling,
and there's no being.
And mindfulness reverses the
whole thing spontaneously.
When you're mindful, you're
in the state of being.
And when you're in
the state of being,
it spontaneously awakens
love and compassion.
And when you're there,
then it spontaneously
unfolds into creativity, and
then you do the right thing.
>> Breathe your life.
It means nothing, and
it means everything.
It depends on our state of mind
because as my brother shared
earlier, all of us, we breathe.
In the womb, mother breathed
for us, and the moment
that we are born
and we start to cry,
that's our first in breath.
And so however old
we are right now,
we have breathed all our lives.
But for most of us,
it means nothing
because we're not aware of it.
There's a breathing
center in the brain that
takes care of it, and so we
do not have to think about it.
We do not have to
be aware of it.
It's done automatically,
and so that's the life
that we have also continues.
It can continue automatically
because the body
has an amazing capacity
to take care of itself,
to regulate itself.
And so breathe is something
can be very automatic
and to be alive can be--
there is something also
very automatic for
our whole lives.
But a person who
learns to be aware
that he or she is breathing,
then it changes everything.
And a person who learns
that he or she is alive,
it really changes everything,
the health, the mental health,
and also the physical health.
So in that way, the awareness of
the body, which is the breath--
we start with the breath.
We learn to be aware
of that, and we
learn to touch the changes
in the breath, the changes
in the breathing patterns.
And through that, we learn
to be more aware of our body.
Right now, some of us are
quite relaxed and some of us
are less relaxed.
But if we are aware
of our breathing,
we will be more aware of whether
we are relaxed or less relaxed.
So we are in touch
with the body.
And when we are
aware of our breath,
also we are aware of our mind
because when we have anger,
we breathe differently.
When we have sadness, worries,
So what do we learn to be
aware, more and more aware
of the patterns of our
breathing and abrupt changes
in every moment,
then we learn to be
aware of what's going
on in our mind, what's
going on in our thoughts
and perceptions that
causes that change
that breathing pattern.
And so it makes life very
dynamic, very lively.
>> I actually think that
mindfulness should be
the centerpiece of psychiatric
treatment because in the West,
we are so
scientifically oriented.
So if we put mindfulness
to rigorous scientific
experimentation,
we find that it has
ways of working with the
mind that calm the mind.
And I think that
in today's world,
where everything is a
disorder-- we're pathologizing
everything--
that mindfulness has a core
and central role in healing.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
>> If you are mindful,
if you are truly there,
you are truly there in
the here and the now.
You are concentrating.
And drinking your
tea in mindfulness
is a spirituality already.
So when you look at one person--
if you are truly aware that
he is there, she is there--
in that person,
there is suffering.
There is the need to transform.
And if you can
look at him or her
with compassion and
understanding like that,
that is spirituality already.
And when you take a step,
and if you are aware
that you are making
this step, that you
are walk, that you touch the
earth with your foot mindfully,
and that is a
spiritual act also.
There is a gatha--
placing your foot on the
ground is to perform a miracle.
Every mindful step
help reveal to you
the Kingdom of God, the
pure land of the Buddha.
So walking with
mindfulness can help
you touch all the
wonders of life that
are available in
the here and now,
and that's very
nourishing and healing.
Many of us walk
like sleepwalkers.
We don't enjoy our steps.
Our mind is elsewhere in
our projects, in the future.
So you don't get the
healing, the transformation.
You don't touch
the Kingdom of God,
with all the wonders, the
blue sky, the flowers that
are blooming, the
green hills, children
who are playing around you.
They all belong to
the Kingdom of God,
to the pure land of the Buddha,
and if you are truly the here
and now, you can get in touch.
So you can live
your spiritual life
in every minute of
your daily life.
Whether you are driving,
eating, cooking, washing,
your life can be
spiritual in every moment.
And if you have enough
healing and peace in you,
everything you do and you say
will help people around you.
>> Being mindful helps you be
a better actor because it helps
you be a better listener, and
I think being a better listener
is the root of being
a better actor.
>> In other words, I'm
not a dog whisperer,
I'm a dog listener because I'm
listening from the moment I am
20 feet in front of a dog.
I know how he feels.
The dog is talking.
They're just a
human not listening.
What dog whisper means
to me is the human
who knows how to listen.
It's not the human who is
whispering in the ear of a dog.
That's a myth.
That's a beautiful title.
That's very magical,
but it's not reality.
The human tells you the story.
The dog tells you the reality.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
>> Many people are not capable
of being happy in the present
moment.
They think it is
impossible for them
to be happy right
now, right here.
They need more conditions
to be happy, so many of them
are looking for happiness
in the future or elsewhere.
But according to the
teaching of the Buddha,
you have enough conditions to be
happy right here and right now.
And mindfulness help you to
go home to the present moment
and to recognize these
conditions of happiness that
are available.
In the teaching of
[? Wudai, ?] it is
said that it is
possible to live happily
right in the here and the now.
And that is why the practice
of mindful breathing, mindful
walking can bring you home
to the here and the now.
The past is only gone.
The future is not yet there.
You only have one moment where
you can live your life deeply.
That is the present moment.
And you have an
appointment with life,
and that appointment takes
place in the present moment.
And if you miss
that present moment,
you'll miss your
appointment with life.
Therefore, I have
arrived means I have
arrived in the present moment.
so that I can meet with
life and come to life.
I have arrived in
the here and the now.
It means I don't run anymore.
I have-- I do not
want to run anymore.
I have run all my life, and that
is why I am determined to stop.
So every breath, every
step brings me back
to the here and
the now, so that I
can be established in
the here and the now
to encounter the wonders
of life that are available.
So I have arrived means I
don't want to run anymore.
I want to touch life deeply, and
life can be touched deeply only
in the here and the now.
And my home is in
the here and the now,
and if you look
deeply, you will see
that the Kingdom of God,
the pure land of the Buddha
and your happiness
must be sought,
must be found in the
here and the now.
We used to say that the
kingdom is now or never.
There is no way to happiness.
Happiness is the way.
You have to find happiness
right in the here and the now.
So I have arrived.
I am home.
It means that I am
fully established
in the present moment.
I am truly alive.
I am truly, fully present.
And that is not a statement.
That is a practice.
And you breathe in such a
way, you walk in such a way
that every breath,
every step brings you
home to the here and the now.
And you are free from your
worries, from your despair,
from your regret.
And getting in touch with
the wonders of life that
are refreshing and
hearing and nourishing,
you get the healing
that you need.
You get the
nourishment you need.
And after that, you can
be helpful to the people
around you.
>> Recently, there is
research on meditation--
and I'm sure it applies
to mindfulness as well--
is that it increases the level
of an enzyme called telomerase.
Telomerase influences the
length of little telomeres,
which are like buttons at
the end of your shoe laces.
Like, your chromosomes have
these buttons similar to that.
As we get older,
these buttons or--
they're called telomeres--
they start to fray,
and then when they start
to fray to a certain level,
that's biological death.
And we measure the
biological clock
through the length of telomeres.
Now, just a few
months ago, there
was a study that was done by
scientists here in California.
One of the authors
of the study is
the woman who won the
Nobel Prize for discovering
telomerase, and they showed
that within three to four months
of meditative
practice, mindfulness,
you increase telomerase.
So you're changing
your biological clock.
>> First benefit is
you're a happy person.
And when I'm under the
weather that I'm happy.
And when I handle
a piece of bread,
I do not need to think anything.
Oh, it's come from the sky,
the good rain, the good farmer,
the good harvest, a lot
of love, a lot of care.
I leave the present
moment, but I
taste the whole universe in that
wonderful way, and I'm happy.
>> Would I say animals are
more mindfully than humans?
A horse, a cat, a dolphin, a dog
will know exactly how you feel,
regardless how different
they are as a species.
Energy is a universal
language that all animals
have the capability
to be mindfully aware.
>> If one has a spiritual
radiance about him,
you sense it.
You sense in the eyes.
You sense it in their
demeanor, and that person
can generally lift up
the spirits of the people
around him.
That's what's remarkable
all over the world,
everywhere I've gone.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
When anger comes up, you feel--
you suffer.
You suffer.
And if you allow anger to
possess you, to overwhelm you,
you go hurt or say things
that will create suffering.
When anger comes up,
if you don't practice,
you will suffer, and you will
make people around you suffer.
And if you are a
practitioner, you
know what to do when
anger is coming up.
You go back to your breathing.
You practice mindful breathing.
You generate the
energy of mindfulness,
and with that energy
of mindfulness,
you recognize that
anger is in you.
Breathing in, I
know anger is in me.
Breathing out, I'm taking
good care of my anger.
I'm holding it peacefully.
And the energy of mindfulness
embracing the energy
of anger, although energy
of anger is still there,
but you are much safer because
mindfulness is also there.
Mindfulness tell
you that anger--
while you are anger, is not goo
say anything, to do anything.
It may cause damage.
So do you just
continue to practice
mindful breathing,
mindful walking,
so that you can take
care of your anger.
And you get a relief, and if you
practice looking more deeply,
you will see the
roots of your anger
and the cause of your
suffering might be in you, not
in the other person.
And if you recognize
things like that,
you can transform your anger.
Sometime, many times,
the seat of anger in you
is very important.
Other people, when they
hear the same sentence,
they don't get angry.
But you, you get angry because
of the seat of anger in you
is too important.
So you now-- you
have the insight
that the suffering
comes from you more than
from the other person.
So that is the kind of insight
that can help you to transform.
And then when you look
deeply at the other person,
you see that that person has
a lot of anger and suffering
in him.
And he does not know how
to handle his suffering,
so he makes people
around him suffer,
and you happen to
be one of them.
So if you try to punish
him, he will suffer more,
and if he suffer more, he
will make you suffer more.
So that person needs help
and does not need punishment.
And you may be motivated by
the desire to go and help him.
And when you are motivated by
a desire to go and help him,
your anger has
become compassion.
You have transformed, so
that is the kind of insight
that you can get
when you practice
mindfulness and concentration.
>> The human brain is a very
fascinating, three pound, soft,
jello-like organ
inside the skull,
which is more complicated than
anything else in the universe.
We have three
parts to our brain.
The first part of the brain
is called the midbrain.
It's also called
the reptilian brain.
The reptilian brain evolved
300 million years ago.
The reason it's called
the reptilian brain
is that when you go
next to a reptile
and you either make a sudden
movement or a sudden noise,
if you're very close, the
reptile will attack you.
If you're a little further
away, it will slither away.
This is the beginning of what
we call the fight or flight
response, and this then
becomes, in our society,
the stress response.
You're not trying to save
yourself from a saber tooth
tiger, but somebody
blows the horn at you
or somebody says
something that triggers,
and all the hurt
pushes your buttons
and you attack or you run.
And sometimes you're not
attacking or running,
but you feel frustrated and
that raises your blood pressure.
Heart rate goes up.
Cortisol goes up.
Adrenaline goes up.
Stress is linked to almost every
major epidemic of civilization.
Whether it is cancer or
heart disease or infections
or premature aging, sudden death
from cardiovascular illness,
all linked to stress.
And this is what the stress
is, the midbrain reacting as it
has done for 300 million years.
Then the second
part of your brain
is called the
limbic brain, which
is about 100 million years old.
This is our emotional brain.
So we have basically
five emotions,
and everything else
is a variant of them.
The first emotion is happiness,
so love, compassion, kindness.
They all fit in happiness.
It makes you happy
when you're in love.
The second emotion is sadness.
The third is anger
and hostility.
The fourth is fear.
The fifth is shame,
and what do you call--
guilt. And every other emotion--
disgust, jealousy--
is a variant of these.
Now, it turns out that
when you're happy--
and this happens
only in mammals.
Reptiles don't have
a emotional life.
But all mammals
form social groups.
All mammals nurture their young.
Believe it or not,
all mammals sing.
All mammals play, and
this is the experience
of what we call love
that occurs immediately
after a child is born and even
in the anticipation of a child.
And it turns out that
our feedback loops,
self-repair mechanisms
in the body,
are matured and
come into existence
as a result of the
experience of love.
If we don't have that attention,
affection, appreciation,
cooing cuddling,
kissing, touching,
the dance between an
adult and a child,
which is eye movements, facial
expressions, body language,
voice tone--
a child doesn't understand
rational language
but understands that
language from day one, OK?
And that is it responsible
for the maturation
of self-repair mechanisms
and self-regulation.
If you're deprived of that,
you will be a sick adult.
When you grow up,
your everything
will be affected because
the self-repair is linked
to hormone levels,
body temperature
regulation, autonomic
responses, everything
that keeps the body healthy.
That's our limbic brain.
Most people have
dysfunctional limbic systems,
in that they're resentful
or angry about the past.
They're anticipating
something fear in the future.
They have shame and
guilt about things
that they regret that
they shouldn't have done.
And as a result, you
their biological systems
are totally disrupted.
But on the other hand, when you
have what the Buddhists call
loving-kindness, joy, peace
of mind, and compassion--
the Buddhists call them
divine attributes--
in that state your body's the
best it could possibly be, OK?
So that's your limbic
brain, and then you
have this cortical
brain, which is huge,
which is only four
million years old.
The cortical brain
houses rationality.
It's also responsible for
orchestrating intention,
and it seems this
is the place we
use for imagination and insight
and intuition and creativity.
Now, here's the secret.
In mindfulness, what
you can learn to do--
and this is proven
scientifically--
you can totally
override your midbrain.
So a person like Thich
Nhat Hahn, for example,
for all practical
purposes, his midbrain
is no longer functioning.
You can't get him to be angry
or feel hostility or resentful.
He's just-- he's quieted it
through mindfulness practice.
And if you sustain that
mindfulness practice,
you feel so connected
that spontaneously,
your limbic system starts to get
activated so you nurture only
healthy emotions, like
love, compassion, joy, et
cetera, that come from
that place of equanimity.
So you're using
your cortical brain
to, first of all, override
the detrimental, destructive
tendencies of the
midbrain, which
is no longer relevant
in the modern society,
and you're also activating
the limbic brain
for nurturing relationships.
You're literally rewiring
your nervous system.
In neuroscience, we say
neurons that fire together
wire together.
You're an intelligent
human being
who has subdued the
reptilian brain, who
knows how to activate
the limbic brain, who
knows how to
self-repair and heal,
who has more intuition, insight,
imagination, creativity,
and choice making.
It's a new evolution
of the human species.
>> Imagine a situation where
your day was going fine.
Someone looked at
you in a way that you
imagined was attacking,
accusatory, or judgmental,
and you get angry.
Now, whereas in the past, you
might have become very angry
and disregulated and done
behaviors that got you
into more trouble, whether
it's drugs or alcohol
or whatever it is, what
you do with mindfulness
is you pay attention to what
is in this present moment.
What happened?
Describe what happened.
The person looked at me
from the side of their face.
They seem to have a frown.
Whatever it is that
you're describing,
you're describing what is,
not what you imagine it to be.
And by doing that, it
gives you a fighting chance
of staying a lot calmer than
what you could have gone,
because once you
start describing,
then you also have the
opportunity to be curious.
You might ask the
person, hey, why did you
give me that bad look?
He say, what bad look?
I have gastric problems from the
burrito I had at lunch today,
and maybe I was grimacing.
I mean, who knows?
>> We should be
listening to each other.
You see what I mean?
Because often, it's little
things that we misinterpret
and we go into fight/flight
avoidance between you and I.
We don't go into surrender.
But once we listen,
we understand.
Oh, I get it.
>> During the day,
these always--
life never unfold
exactly like we wish,
and so we have to expect that
when people promise something,
they don't do it.
And it's normal that
we feel irritate.
But we feel irritate, we
say that when I'm irritate,
I do not fulfill my
task in the best way.
So I go back to my in
breath and out breath
and calming and relaxing
and say that I will do it.
So you note that
unsatisfied thing,
and you do other thing who
make you not irritate first.
You come back.
You will come back.
But while you do the
other job profoundly,
the other things will
settle a little bit.
And then sometime
during your work--
the second work have nothing
to do with the first work that
make you irritate.
Second, work
mindfully-- suddenly
that is an insight
because your irritation
send the message into
your soul consciousness.
It mean the deep part of
yourself, your unconscious.
That person is always like that.
He has that quality.
He has that weakness.
So suddenly, you remember
that to handle that situation,
you have to touch
that point in order
to help him to change
or help her to change.
So and then you go
back to your work.
You say, that, I
don't handle yet.
>> You're listening to the
outcome, not the fundamentals.
So it's fundamentals,
technique, and outcome.
Most of the people
sees aggression.
I see before aggression.
Therefore, I can
prevent aggression.
>> Just take those three seconds
when you walk into a room
and when you walk into
any new situation.
And that helps me quite a bit
because we're taking in so much
that I find if I just don't
just blow through everything
and I take those three seconds,
or I get a new situation, if I
just--
I will find that I have
that intuitive notion,
and if I just I just hit
it there for a second.
I've got the information that
I need to handle each given
situation, that it's
been put before me
and I have it in
my head account.
I've been given that
information already.
I've seen it somewhere.
I have it in my mind.
I've been prepared for the
things that are befalling me.
I'm actually ready.
You almost see it
before it happens.
You can see it coming.
It's like if you would see--
like a tsunami, you see the
wave far out in the ocean.
It's like it's slow motion.
Ah, there's the wave.
I think I'll go get my
stuff, put it in the car,
and drive far up
in the mountain,
long before the wave
comes to the shore.
>> In mindfulness, there's
also these mindful practices.
First, you you evoke
love and compassion
in your mind for somebody
that it would be easy
for you to do, like your child
or your spouse or somebody
that you really care about.
You evoke that in your mind.
You observe an act of
compassion or love.
But then you could go to
the mall and see a stranger.
And if you're mindful,
you'll realize
that that stranger
has joy and sorrow,
like you do, pleasure
and pain, like you do,
is going to grow old, like you
do, who's going to die one day,
like you do.
And when you do that,
you have compassion
for that human being,
because he's just like you.
And then, you can do that with
an enemy, a perceived enemy.
And slowly, you train
your mind in such a way
that you deprive
yourself of all enemies.
>> Well, that's one of the
things that people enjoy
the most about an animal, right?
The number one is
unconditional love.
Number two is how
present they are.
Number three is they
live in the moment.
Number four is there
the master of forgiving.
How many times human
makes mistakes.
Every single day.
How often the dog forgive them?
>> One of the best goals of
Buddhism is to take negative
energy and make it positive, and
that's not always easy to do.
>> During the war in Vietnam, I
heard that my hometown had been
bombarded.
And I right away took many
means to go to my hometown.
And when I arrived, I
was so mad because most
of the house, big cows--
unfortunately, only my
house is halfly bombarded,
but we still live in.
Parts of other house
have been bombed,
and people cry and
scream and they
say, oh, they hate all the--
they hate the sight
of nationalist.
They hate the
sight of communist.
They said that.
And the communist
tried to provoke,
and then the nationalists called
American plane to bombard.
And so I'm angry at everything.
I don't know, and so I
said that, what I can do?
I went back to my breath,
and I walk calmly.
Mindfully, I walk.
And during, I tried to
be mindful in my step.
It means my mind
only with the contact
of my shoes and the ground.
That's all.
And I walk.
I walk, and suddenly,
among the green,
I started the little
flower, very tiny,
little violet flower come
through all the rain,
like smiling.
And I said, oh,
the little flower.
They have to grow through
all this wind and bloom.
And me, I cannot be my peace?
And then I calm myself,
and I look around.
And I tried to see
positive things.
I see that the people who try
their best to do something
to help those who
are wounded, those
who are still very something.
And so there are people who make
rice more to go and distribute
to those who have nothing.
There are those who
carry because bombard
is gone already.
And so I feel that I see many
bodhisattva, many great being,
who are not angry like
me and want to shout,
but they try to help
to do normal thing, so
that these things to the--
going to my peace that I can
see many wonderful things.
And when you have your own
peace, you know what to do
and what not to do.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
>> First of all, you have to
recognize that fear is in you.
Lots of people, most of
people try to forget.
They are afraid of many things.
They're afraid of
losing their job,
that the other person does
not love them anymore,
that tomorrow,
they will be sick,
abandoned, that they will
die, things like that.
And they don't want to
think about these things.
They get busy in
order to forget.
And most of the time, the fear
does not have a foundation.
They're afraid of things
that do not exist,
and that is why they
need to look deeply,
or they might need a
friend to tell them
that their fear
has no foundation
so that they can recognize
the nature of their fear
and get liberate.
There is a wonderful
practice in Buddhism
that is very helpful for
us to reduce our suffering.
That is the practice of
avoiding the second arrow.
When someone is stuck by--
when someone is hit by
an arrow, that person's
suffers, of course.
But if a second arrow comes
and strike him or her exactly
at the same spot, the pain
will be many, many times
more intense, and that is why
it is very helpful to avoid
the second arrow.
And the Buddha said that
sometime something happen
to your body, to your
mind, you suffer.
But if you get angry at it, if
you worry too much about it,
you will magnify the
pain into 100 times.
So if you imagine
too much, if you
don't know the
reality of your pain,
then you will suffer 10
times more or 100 times more.
So that kind of anger,
that kind of imagination,
that kind of fear
intensified your pain
by 10 time, 100 time more.
That is the second arrow.
So fear can make you
suffer much more,
and fear is based on ignorance.
And that is why
looking deeply help
you to have the insight
that can dissipate,
remove your ignorance.
And a [INAUDIBLE]
friend can help
you to see that your
fear has no foundation.
>> I grew up on a
farm, number one.
I grew up with a philosophy
of never work against Mother
Nature.
Always make sure you, human,
gain their trust, respect them.
They're going to give you a
beautiful gift called loyalty.
So once you grew up with
those two sentences,
this is what you become, right?
You live a philosophy.
You live a lifestyle that
triggers an energy in you.
Well, in the animal
world, this is
very attractive, to
be calm from within.
Because animals' biggest goal
is the family and the harmony,
to be part of a family and
to live a harmonious life.
Once you study human,
that's not his goal.
His goal is fame.
His goal is money.
His goal is a degree.
My clients are Harvard
graduate, but they
can't walk a chihuahua.
>> Whether you have a
psychological reason or whether
you have a spiritual thing, it
is undeniable that stress is
taking a massive
toll on this country,
how we think about each other,
and that by bringing mindful
practice back, an ancient
practice that was always
there--
the wisdom to use it
was always there--
back into our lives,
we begin to have
a much healthier and holistic
way of approaching stress,
and, in fact, bring a stillness
and contentment to our life
that is more profound
than any quick hit.
>> We do things the way we
do because we're not aware.
So then it's just a pattern.
You go out every Friday
night and things like that,
but it becomes very boring.
But you still go because
what else do you do?
So I share with teenagers that--
be aware of what's going on.
And when you have that
sense of calmness,
it's actually very
attractive to others.
When you are calm
and composed and you
seem to be at ease
with yourself,
all the guys will
come and ask you.
Or you have enough confidence
to go and ask a guy to dance.
So that's a little tip I
share with the young people.
>> I think people can have these
things happen just because you
need some help.
You need some way to
balance your life.
For me, this mindfulness,
this way to be responsible,
this way to be
respectful to yourself
and others, this way to
find a quiet journey when
the world just seems too chaotic
and when things are happening
to you and you
think, I just don't
know how I can handle
all of these things.
It's going to be a balance.
Nothing is just great all the
time, and you're going to--
life is difficult.
Life is a struggle.
You have to work hard
to have things go ahead.
And life doesn't get easier,
but things get easier
to understand.
>> Neurotic environment
makes a neurotic dog.
Aggressive environment
makes an aggressive dog.
A fearful environment
makes a fearful dog.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
>> For those of us who have
looked deeply into the nature
of sickness, of
death, of old age,
we can also transcend our fear.
Because looking deeply, we can
see that it is possible for us
to go through these things
peacefully, sickness,
old age, and death.
When you look at a cloud
and if you look deeply,
you'll see that the
nature of a cloud
is a nature of no
birth and no death.
A cloud has not
come from non-being
before the cloud is a cloud.
The cloud had been
other things, so a cloud
has not come from nothing.
So the nature of the
cloud is no birth.
The appearance of the
cloud, the form of a cloud
is only a continuation.
Before the cloud is a cloud,
it has been the water vapor.
It has been the
water in the ocean,
the heat generated by the sun.
So the cloud is
only a continuation.
And when the cloud cease to
be a cloud, that's not dying.
A cloud cannot die.
It's impossible
for a cloud to die.
A cloud can become
rain, snow, or ice,
but a cloud cannot
become nothing.
And if the cloud
knows how to meditate,
it will see that this nature is
nature of no death, no drying.
To be a cloud floating
in the sky is wonderful,
but to become the rain falling
on a rice field on a mountain
is also wonderful.
And a cloud can look down
and see part of the cloud
has become the river, so to
become a river is so nice.
And when you practice
meditation deeply,
you see that your
nature is nature
of no birth and
no death, and you
can transcend the fear of
birth and death, you see?
So there are many
ways of practice
in order to deal with our fear.
And because we are so
busy now in daily life,
we have no time in
our life to practice.
We have become victims of our
fear and anger, frustration.
And that is why
is very important
that everyone in society should
bring in a spiritual dimension
to their life, so that
they will suffer less.
A politician, a businessman,
a schoolteacher, a filmmaker
should bring in their
life a spiritual dimension
so that they will suffer less.
And when they suffer less, they
can do their job much better.
>> There's no need to fear death
because death doesn't happen
to you.
Death is-- basically,
you upgrade the illusion,
I think, after death.
>> There is no way to happiness.
Happiness is the way.
There is no way to peace.
Peace is the way.
And the way is to
breathe in mindfully.
The way is to take one
mindful step because when
you when you do that, the energy
of mindfulness is generated.
And it is exactly with
that energy of mindfulness
that you can recognize
the suffering inside.
And you embrace it,
and you get a relief.
>> We are not human beings
who have occasional spiritual
experiences.
We are spiritual beings who have
occasional human experiences.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
>> If you don't have peace,
you cannot offer peace.
If you don't have calm,
you cannot offer calm.
If you don't have compassion,
you cannot offer compassion.
And therefore, you
have to walk your path.
You have to do it for you first.
If you don't know how to
take care of yourself,
if you don't know
how to love yourself,
you cannot take care
of another person.
You cannot love another person.
So self-love, self-protection
is the foundation
for the love and protection
of another person.
>> When you are
involved in the process,
the outcome is going to be good.
So I've been-- I've
trained executive leaders
for leadership and
business skills.
I tell them, pursue
excellence and ignore success.
Because if you pursue
success, then your whole body
will go into stress response.
When you pursue excellence,
your whole body will go into joy
and the success is guaranteed.
If I'm walking
from here to there,
I shouldn't be
always looking there.
I'll stumble.
I should be mindful
of my walking.
If I'm studying for an exam,
I shouldn't be thinking
of the results of all the time.
I should be studying.
That's mindfulness.
That guarantees success, but
you're not attached to it
because it comes from within.
You see, people who
are attached think
there's something out there that
is the source of their success
or whatever happiness.
But happiness, success,
all these things
that human beings pursue, the
source is within yourself.
>> It's a training, a training
to remember that in us,
there is that ability to be very
peaceful, very understanding,
very loving.
But with the busy life,
and especially if we are
surround by very
negative condition,
we are easily irritate.
And when we irritate, we
are like a pond of water
very turbulent and you do
not see anything clear.
And then practice is to
restore the stillness
of the water in you,
the peace in you.
And when you see,
you are a limpid,
more clear in your mind.
You see thing in its totality.
I usually say that when
your mind is agitate,
you look at the moon and
you only see little piece.
But when your mind is still,
you can see the whole totality
of the full moon.
>> The dog mindfulness
is helping us,
but our lack of being
mindful is hurting them.
>> So there's something to be
said that no matter how much
the world will
condemn somebody--
you remember the story of Jesus?
He was condemned too.
No matter how much the
world condemns the man,
open your heart to what
that man is saying.
There might be a message there.
>> What's difficult it is for
the psychiatrist who's got 15
minutes to write a prescription.
It's difficult for them
to integrate mindfulness
into those practices.
For people who have a full
hour, they're able to do this.
But the irony or the silliness
to this is that a prescription
that I give you-- that I write,
and I can write every month--
you take it once a day, comes
with side effects, costs
you, costs the
insurance company.
Mindfulness-- and I
sometimes do this.
I'll take up my prescription
pad, and they'll say,
you need to give me
something for anxiety.
So I say, I've got
just the thing for you.
And I'll write this--
mindfulness, take
daily as needed,
may repeat as many
times as you want.
And then I'll take out this
and I'll hand it to them
and they'll look at
me as if I'm crazy.
And I'll say, this is
the way out for you.
>> You are in a situation
where you suffer very deeply.
There is a way to suffer
that can bring relief.
And everyone wants to learn
how to suffer like that
in order not to suffer.
And the practice is very clear.
Don't be afraid
of your suffering.
Live with it.
Take one deep breath,
come back to yourself,
and recognize the suffering
and try to hold it dearly.
You can do that because while
you are breathing in mindfully,
you generate the
energy of mindfulness.
And it is exactly with
that energy of mindfulness
that you can recognize and
embrace your suffering.
Otherwise, you are
overwhelmed by your suffering.
The practice of
mindful breathing,
the practice of mindful
walking helps generate
that energy of mindfulness.
Without that
mindfulness, you are
overwhelmed by your suffering.
With that mindfulness,
you are able to recognize
the suffering, embrace it,
and be at peace with it.
And that is how you
learn how to suffer.
>> Now, at Gallup,
we've done studies--
I'm part of Gallup
organization--
that if you have a happy friend,
your happiness goes up by 15%.
If you have a happy friend
who has a happy friend,
it goes up another 10%.
And if the happy friend's happy
friend has a happy friend,
it goes up again, incrementally.
So your happiness is dependent
on the happiness of others,
and we are all entangled.
We are entangled
horizontally now,
not only through relationships
but through social networks,
Twitter or Facebook,
this, that, and the other.
The other day, somebody
asked me on Twitter,
how do I find the right person?
And I just tweeted back.
I said, instead of finding
the right person become
the right person.
Now, within five minutes,
people started retweeting it.
And in five hours,
five million people
were passing on the message.
So our emotions are contagious,
our thoughts, our insights.
And these networks
are taking that mind
and proving what I said, that
there is no separate self.
And not only is there no
separate self horizontally
but vertically
because your mind is
influenced by the
cultural mind that
goes back millions of years.
So vertically-- we
exchange meaning
through each other horizontally
through relationship,
and this is through
social networks--
but vertically through
culture and history.
In other words, if
you go deep enough,
your mind is all mind ever
since the beginning of time.
>> But it is also very important
to be careful and understand
that you have to be
mindful of your compassion,
that there are people who
are not quality people,
and there are people who choose
to be lost each and every day.
There are people that are--
if you keep giving
them your love,
they're not going to get better.
They're not people who were
just hurt in their childhood
and if you love them and
love them and love them,
you're going to fix them.
And so if you just keep being
compassionate and loving
and they keep being
mean and abusive,
your compassion is going
to make them better.
There are people who
wake up every day,
and they're lost on purpose.
And it's very important for
you to be mindful of yourself
and to observe people with
thoughtful mindfulness--
mindful of yourself,
mindful of them--
and be aware if that person is
choosing to be lost every day.
>> The world loves dogs,
but it behaves like a cat.
You know what I mean?
So when it comes to--
when you see behavior,
cat-- you have excuse the cat
because the cat was programmed
that way.
The human is not
programmed to be selfish.
The human is programmed
to be pack-oriented,
but when it's money
involved and then
it becomes single-oriented.
What everybody wants is
trust, respect, and love,
but that's what you want.
Are you giving it?
That's the question.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
There are people
who just do that.
They don't need another
person to tell them.
They have learned from
their own suffering.
They know that they
waste their life if they
live without mindfulness.
The opposite of mindfulness
is forgetfulness.
You live in forgetfulness.
You live like a robot.
You are on automatic pilot.
And there are those of us
who need a friend in order
to learn how to live mindfully
by watching that friend,
walking, sitting, drinking
his tea, something like that.
Everyone has the capacity
of being mindful.
You can drink your
tea mindfully.
You can drive your
car mindfully, only
your mindfulness last
just one or two seconds.
So if you train
yourself, then you
can be mindful for longer times.
And when you are
mindful, you enjoy more.
You are truly there, and you
live more deeply every moment
of your daily life.
And that's not hard work.
It's very pleasant.
>> So some people think
that mindfulness is--
identify with being a
hippy, with Burning Man,
with sitting around singing "Kum
ba ya," smoking a little peyote
or whatever it is, it's this
really alternative practice.
But in reality, mindfulness is
being practiced in Ivy League
schools, at all the
major universities,
and a lot of therapists
and psychologists
are doing it themselves.
Although you wouldn't
know about it
because they're not
talking about it,
and a lot of people who are
serious members of society--
that are very respected, who
wouldn't be connected with
desert-dwelling
peyote-smoking hippie--
are doing mindfulness.
>> It's a reckoning
with yourself every day,
which is essentially a
solitude, and a solitude
that's disciplined in the
sense that you have to--
when you wander off into
the clouds of thoughts
that you have, you gently
return to the center.
>> Everyone can do it.
A Buddhist can do it.
A non-Buddhist can do it.
A Christian, a Jew, a
communist-- everyone can do it.
>> Life is simple.
We make a complicated.
>> I think if you
start with say,
mindful awareness of
breath as a lifestyle,
it soon becomes a meditative
experience living.
>> The only way to
do it is to practice.
And it is true, like
with any other skill
with any other practice,
that the more you do it,
the better you get at it.
And the more
efficient it becomes,
and the easier it is to do.
>> No matter what the
situation in the world,
you can breathe through it.
>> And the breath is the link
between the body and the mind.
And tends to the breath--
you go back and you
pay attention only
to the in breath, the air which
is entering into your lung,
and you're calm.
Breathing out, you relax.
You calm.
You relax when you
do it for a while,
and then you touch
slowly your peace.
And when you have that
peace, you start to think
and you start to speak or act.
So that is the key point for
those who practice mindfulness.
>> The breathing in
should be pleasant.
If you don't feel a pleasure
when you're breath in,
you are not really
practicing correctly.
In the beginning, you might just
focus your attention to your
in breath.
Your in breath might be
short, not very peaceful.
But you allow it
to be like that.
You just allow
yourself to breathe in
and to become aware
of your in breath.
And if you continue like that,
your in breath and out breath
will be come deeper, more
harmonious, more peaceful
by itself alone.
That is the miracle of practice.
And when your in
breath and out breath
has become a little bit
deeper, slower, more peaceful,
your body will profit from it.
The stress, the
tension in your body
will be reduced because
you'll know how to breathe
in peacefully and with harmony.
And so even if you
have a painful feeling,
a painful emotion within
yourself, mindful breathing,
the peaceful breathing will help
you to suffer less right away.
>> When I wake up, I train
myself to see that I have 24
hour to live deeply.
It doesn't mean that my
day is only wonderful.
I have many stressful
thing to do.
But I say that I vow to make
my days more relaxing, even I
have a lot of expiring
date, project due to finish.
But I have to do that in
order to remind myself.
That is the first act.
And then I start to
stand them up and walk,
and I walk mindfully.
That is straining.
It's not easy.
>> I don't see a
dog as a student,
I see a dog as a teacher.
What the human have to do is
to humble himself and learn
from an animal
because a human always
wants to teach the animal.
>> For businessmen walking
from one building to another,
he might enjoy
every step he make.
He has to make a
decision, of course.
But why walking?
He might like to enjoy
every step that he makes.
And if he can get the
peace, the joy while
walking, when he
arrived is fresh
and he can make a
better decision.
>> Quiet doesn't mean calm.
He's sitting down,
which a lot of people
interpret as he's calm.
No, quiet and calm is
two different things.
A lot of people say,
"I am calm, Cesar."
They're quiet.
This is calm, not calm, calm.
>> With mindfulness
practice and meditation,
you can turn on the good genes
and turn off the bad genes.
There are about 400 to 500
genes that influence things
like inflammation, autoimmune
illnesses, heart disease,
and certain types of cancer.
Within four months, you
can turn on the good ones
and turn off the bad ones
through the following things--
good sleep, meditation,
mindfulness, exercise,
healthy relationships, and
a reasonably good diet,
which means not eating
anything that comes in a can
or has a label.
So that is genetic
indeterminism,
which means regulating
your own genes.
And then neuroplasticity-- when
you change your brain structure
through mindful practices,
you're going through the genes.
And neurons that fire
together, wire together.
You're laying down new proteins.
In order to lay
down new proteins,
you've got to go through DNA.
You've got to go through
what is called transcription
and translation,
so you're actually
turning on genes to do that.
>> I have said that there
are people who learn from
themselves, from
their own suffering.
And there are those who
can learn from a friend,
from a teacher.
They had to learn.
There are those who
read books and know
how to do it by themselves.
There are those who
need to go to a teacher,
to a group of friends.
We have to learn, and the
best thing you might offer,
best gift you can make to a
friend might be to tell him
or to tell her how to live his
or her life more deeply, more
mindfully.
But you cannot do that
unless you know how to do it.
You have to live
your life mindfully.
You have the capacity
of arriving in the here
and the now, feeling at home
in the here and the now,
before you can help
another person.
And one person living like
that can help so many people.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
>> So how do we, then, begin
to integrate mindfulness?
I think there has to be
a point at which you say,
what I'm doing isn't
working for me.
The other solutions--
talking to my friends--
isn't working for me, if
it isn't, and so I now
need to do something else.
The problem is that for
a lot of Westerners,
they are so used to very
rapid results, where
everything is, I want this now.
The practice of
mindfulness can sometimes
take much longer
than a pill does.
So certainly, a line
of cocaine or a line
or a shot of heroin
or a drug is going
to make you feel
better much quicker.
At the end of the day
though, is that the aftermath
of that line of
cocaine and the heroin
is tremendous unhappiness.
So it's a short-term solution
to a long term problem.
>> It's biologically ingrained
in us to live in a way that is
of the least resistance, the way
that is easiest and also just
safest.
Like our ancestors,
animals, first human beings
when they lived in a cave,
the most important thing
was to survive, to be safe.
So we developed
instincts that helped us.
If we hear a noise, we'll have
a fight or flight response
immediately.
Or we see something.
We immediately
categorize it so that we
can make a very quick decision
whether it is something
safe or something unsafe.
So that was developed very
early in our history as living
beings, and so that's
much more ingrained.
The capacity to be aware, the
capacity to recognize, to--
those are much more
developed, and they
have been developed much later
in our history, especially
the evolutionary of human
beings, of the Homo sapiens.
So when we have the brain,
the cortex, developed,
that includes our capacity,
like mindfulness, awareness,
compassion, altruism.
But those are
developed much later.
So for us, we live
with our instincts,
and that's easier and quicker.
We can make a quick
decision, and that's
why I will share later that
life can be very monotonous.
Because we look at something, we
immediately make a conclusion.
Oh, it's a tree.
It's an animal.
It's that friend or that's
my wife or something.
And we make that
decision immediately,
and so then it's over.
The brain doesn't
process anymore.
We don't see the situation,
the person anymore.
The brain shuts down and look
for another new stimulus,
you see?
But learning to be
mindful, it takes more work
because it takes us
to still the mind,
to quiet the mind so that
the brain doesn't just
make a top-down control, a
top-down decision to say,
that is that.
But we keep the mind
quiet, so that we
continue to process that
stimulus, that person, that--
maybe our wife, our children,
ourselves, our feelings,
our body.
The brain continues to be in
touch with that in a new way
we call the beginner's mind.
We are in touch with
it new every moment.
And it is a mental training.
We have that capacity within
us, but the other capacity
of relying on our
instincts, that's
much more ingrained and
much easier and quicker.
>> People have been bamboozled
and hypnotized into hard work,
exacting plans,
driving ambition,
which is the perfect
recipe for failure.
It's part of the
Judeo-Christian ethic.
Work hard, make
plans, be ambitious,
beat the other guy, et cetera.
And it's the perfect
recipe for failure
because even when you get there,
you won't be a happy person.
>> But it's an explanation of,
what's the difference between
happiness and pleasure?
And pleasure is the thing that
you do and you get it right now
and it's all great,
right that second.
And happiness is the choice
that you make that sustains.
And I really think it gets
really simple to pick.
If I have three martinis, I'm
going to get a great big buzz,
and I'm going to feel
really crappy tomorrow.
If I don't have three martinis,
but I sit with my friends
and do the mindful thing, I'm
going to have a lot of fun
right now and I'm going to
have a lot of fun tomorrow.
>> My mind is with my
step, and then when I enter
into the washroom, I open the
water tap to clean my face.
But my mind is with the water
tap, and when I open the water,
I see the water.
And then some time,
my mind is so deep
that I see something
that, usually,
if my mind is not there, I
do not see, like the water.
Our ancestor do not have water
in our washroom like that.
They have to go far
and pick up the water.
And in some area, there's
so very little water.
And here, the water flow clean,
and I only swish the water tap.
In the left side, it
will be cold water
and the right side
will be hot water.
And it's so wonderful,
and so I feel
that the wisdom of
many generation,
of previous generation,
the plumber, the engineer
to bring that wonderful water.
Hot water-- in the cold
winter, I have so warm.
Hot water is--
I cannot take it for granted.
When I see deeply like
that, I'm so happy.
>> The bottom line is that
mindfulness is a cleaner,
side effect-free way to
longer-term mental health
stability way of being than
any of these other short-term
solutions that come
with side effects.
>> You have the
potential for greatness.
You're a field of
infinite possibilities.
Your intentions
are very powerful.
You have infinite
creativity, and you're
connected to all that exists,
not only now, but in the past
and in the future.
You are the
immeasurable potential
of all that was, all that is,
and all that will ever be.
>> Every morning when
I wake up, I am happy.
>> Life is a miracle.
When you breathe
in mindfully, you
might get insight that
you are still alive.
And to see that you are
alive is only a miracle.
A person who is already dead
cannot breathe in anymore,
cannot take another
step anymore.
So when you breathe
in mindfully or when
you make a step
mindfully, you realize
the miracle of being
alive and that miracle
can happen in every moment.
[MEDITATION CHIME]
[GUITAR MUSIC PLAYING]